---
toc: true
...

# 2021 in books

<style>
h1 {
  clear: both;
}
figure {
  width: 30%;
  float: right;
  margin: 0 0 1em 1em;
}
</style>

I was pretty lazy with writing longer book reviews in 2021, but here's a list
with mini-reviews of what I've read last year.

## Thinking in Systems

![[*Thinking in Systems: A Primer*][tis] by Donella
Meadows](images/2022-01-01-tis-cover.png)

[tis]: <https://www.chelseagreen.com/product/thinking-in-systems/>

We read this in one of book clubs we have at work. I found it to be pretty dry,
and it wasn't straightforward to apply any learnings from it to software
engineering, or at least that's how the discussions felt to me. My favourite
bits were the examples, but I don't think I've taken much with me that's
actionable, other than the good feeling of having read this classic. Which also
isn't actionable.

## Code

![[*Code: The Hidden Language of Computer Hardware and Software*][code] by
Charles Petzold](images/2022-01-01-code-cover.jpg)

[code]: <https://www.charlespetzold.com/code/>

My favourite read of the year! I've written a [longer review] about this. We
read it in our tech book club, and I've learned a lot from it. I'd love to go
deeper on the topic by either [building a CPU from first principles][cpu], do
the [Nand2Tetris] courses, or read [*Computer Systems: A Programmer's
Perspective*][csapp].

[longer review]: <2021-05-24-code-book-review.html>
[cpu]:           <https://eater.net/8bit>
[nand2tetris]:   <https://www.nand2tetris.org/>
[csapp]:         <https://csapp.cs.cmu.edu/>

## 20 Patterns to Watch for in Your Engineering Team

![[*20 patterns to watch for in your engineering
team*][20patterns]](images/2022-01-01-20-patterns-cover.png)

[20patterns]: <https://www.pluralsight.com/product/flow/20-patterns>

This book is meant to help better understand patterns you can observe when
using [Pluralsight Flow][pf], an engineering metrics tool. For my taste, it is
biased too much towards an environment where the expectation is that developers
do nothing but code, all day every day.

[pf]: <https://www.pluralsight.com/product/flow>

## The Design of Everyday Things

![[*The Design of Everyday Things*][tdoet] by Don
Norman](images/2022-01-01-tdoet-cover.jpg)

[tdoet]: <https://www.basicbooks.com/titles/don-norman/the-design-of-everyday-things/9780465050659/>

Another work book club book; this has been on my "to read" list for a long
time. It was a real slog to get through, and though there's a ton of repetition
in the text, reading it felt like hard work. My main takeaway is the
terminology coined by Norman, and being able to point out when somebody mixes
up signifiers and affordances. I also pay a lot of attention to doors now.

## Fundamentals of Software Architecture

![[*Fundamentals of Software Architecture: An Engineering Approach*][fosa] by
Mark Richards and Neal Ford](images/2022-01-01-fosa-cover.png)

[fosa]: <http://fundamentalsofsoftwarearchitecture.com/>

This is probably the first use of the O'Reilly subscription I get through work.
As it turns out, they have basically everything!

True to its title, this book clarifies the fundamentals of software
architecture, and in doing so defines a lot of terms everybody seems to have a
different idea about. Now, if everybody would just read the book...

Some examples are a bit hand-wavy, but I did like the quantitative approach
shown. Maybe the architects who produce a slide deck and then move on without
anything ever happening aren't actually doing a great job after all!

## UNIX and Linux System Administration Handbook

![[*UNIX and Linux System Administration Handbook*][ulsah], 5th ed., by Evi
Nemeth *et al.*](images/2022-01-01-ulsah-cover.jpg)

[ulsah]: <https://admin.com/>

I wanted to read ULSAH for a long time, and seeing it in the O'Reilly catalogue
was enough to get me started. It took me quite a long time to get through, but
I feel like I've learned a lot (DNS! Booting! Virtualization!). Each chapter is
a great overview of a topic, and offers tons of references to go deeper if
desired. And, unexpectedly, the book was funny in a very subtle way.

## The Goal

![[*The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement*][goal] by Eliyahu M.
Goldratt](images/2022-01-01-goal-cover.jpg)

[goal]: <https://northriverpress.com/the-goal-30th-anniversary-edition/>

The one physical book I've read this year! I got this for a promotion at work.
I think it holds up extremely well, and it made me want to re-read *The Phoenix
Project*. Unlike the latter, *The Goal* actually explains why it's written as a
first-person fictional story, and why the main character has seemingly
unrelated marriage problems. Without knowing any of this, TPP was kind of
strange to read, though still entertaining.

## Software Tools in Pascal

![[*Software Tools in Pascal*][stip] by Brian W. Kernighan and P. J.
Plauger](images/2022-01-01-stip-cover.jpg)

[stip]: <https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.5555/578272>

I have started reading old Kernighan books a while ago, but somehow got stuck
on *Software Tools*, mostly because I did the exercises, in Pascal. On this
second attempt, I didn't do the exercises, but I finally understand where you
have to put semicolons in Pascal!

I found this a very instructional read, which has changed the way I approach
writing small programs myself, and my thinking about what features belong
where. It is also a masterclass in writing about programs.

## Data Science at the Command Line

![[*Data Science at the Command Line: Obtain, Scrub, Explore, and Model Data
with Unix Power Tools*][dsatcl], 2nd ed., by Jeroen
Janssens](images/2022-01-01-dsatcl-cover.jpg)

[dsatcl]: <https://datascienceatthecommandline.com/2e/>

The first edition of this was part of a Humble Bundle I bought a while back,
but by the time I considered reading it, the second edition was close to being
finished, so I just waited for that.

DSatCL introduces a very structured approach to what I often do already, and
I'm excited to adopt some of the practices such as using Makefiles to keep the
chaos at bay. I also want to learn more about the R/ggplot-based plotting
tools, and use them in some of my projects.

## HTML5 for Web Designers

![[*HTML5 for Web Designers*][html5], 2nd ed., by Jeremy Keith and Rachel
Andrew](images/2022-01-01-html5-cover.jpg)

[html5]: <https://abookapart.com/products/html5-for-web-designers>

Work on my [Pandoc Bash Blog][pbb] has stalled somewhat recently, but I have a
bunch of things I'd like to do with it, many of which require some frontend
chops. Since the entire library from [A Book Apart][aba] is on O'Reilly, why
not read some of them? (Or all?)

This is the first book of the entire series, and I only realized when I was
done that there is a second edition. And even that one is a few years old, but
together with reading lots of [MDN documentation][mdn], I feel like I'm now
more or less up to speed.

[pbb]: <https://github.com/bewuethr/pandoc-bash-blog>
[aba]: <https://abookapart.com/>
[mdn]: <https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/HTML>

## CSS3 for Web Designers

![[*CSS3 for Web Designers*][css3], 2nd ed., by Dan
Cederholm](images/2022-01-01-css3-cover.jpg)

[css3]: <https://abookapart.com/products/css3-for-web-designers>

The second book from A Book Apart. This time, I read the second edition right
away. I think browser support has improved quite a lot since this book was
written, but it definitely helped me better understand transitions and
animations.

## The Elements of Content Strategy

![[*The Elements of Content Strategy*][eocs] by Erin
Kissane](images/2022-01-01-eocs-cover.jpg)

[eocs]: <https://abookapart.com/products/the-elements-of-content-strategy>

Reading this was mostly because of completionsim, but it turned out to be quite
interesting nonetheless. I'm a little less confused about "content strategy"
now.

## Mastering Blockchain

![[*Mastering Blockchain: Unlocking the Power of Cryptocurrencies, Smart
Contracts, and Decentralized Applications*][mbc] by Lorne Lantz and Daniel
Cawrey](images/2022-01-01-mbc-cover.jpg)

[mbc]: <https://www.oreilly.com/library/view/mastering-blockchain/9781492054696/>

I read this mostly to understand all the buzzwords and getting an idea of the
fundamentals of cryptocurrencies. The book mostly got that job done, and also
confirmed my disinterest in the space---but now I can better explain why! It
also tremendously improved my understanding of the [crypto episode][sv] of
*Silicon Valley*.

[sv]: <https://www.imdb.com/title/tt8074910/>

## The Little Book of HTML/CSS Coding Guidelines

![[*The Little Book of HTML/CSS Coding Guidelines*][lbohccg] by Jens Oliver
Meiert](images/2022-01-01-lbohccg-cover.jpg)

[lbohccg]: <https://www.oreilly.com/library/view/the-little-book/9781492048459/>

I thought I'd read this before, but apparently not... I was looking for a CSS
style guide, and this contains at least a sketch of one. It also describes how
to come up with and socialize coding guidelines more generally.

## The Docker Book

![[*The Docker Book: Containerization is the New Virtualization*][tdb] by James
Turnbull](images/2022-01-01-tdb-cover.jpg)

[tdb]: <https://dockerbook.com/>

I wanted to much better understand how Docker works, and this helped a bit, but
the e-book formatting was so annoying that I almost stopped reading. Docker has
also evolved quite a bit since this was written, so I'll have to read some more
anyway.
