---
toc: true
...

# 2022 in books

<style>
h2 {
  clear: both;
}
figure {
  width: 30%;
  float: right;
  margin: 0 0 1em 1em;
}
</style>

I was quite happy with this post format [a year ago][2021inbooks], so here's a
list of very short book reviews for what I've read in 2022. Way more fiction,
compared to none at all a year ago!

[2021inbooks]: <2022-01-01-2021-in-books.html>

## Responsive Web Design

![[*Responsive Web Design*][rwd], 2nd ed., by Ethan
Marcotte](images/2023-01-01-rwd-cover.jpg)

[rwd]: <https://abookapart.com/products/responsive-web-design>

Reading this was part of my long-term low-priority project "read all *A Book
Apart* books", because they're nice and short, and they help extend my
backend-focused horizons. The second edition is from 2015, so there's no
mention of flexbox and grids, which I'm pretty sure would dominate a
contemporary version.

It wasn't all useless, though, and among other things has nice introductions to
media queries and mobile-first design.

## Designing for Emotion

![[*Designing for Emotion*][dfe], 2nd ed., by Aarron
Walter](images/2023-01-01-dfe-cover.jpg)

[dfe]: <https://abookapart.com/products/designing-for-emotion>

I found this pretty interesting because it comes with lots of examples of
companies I'm familiar with, and I could always think about the design of the
product of the company I work for as well. As always, I was thrilled to find
references to books I've read previously, such as applying the "Peak-end Rule"
from [*Thinking, Fast and Slow*][tfas] to figure out when to talk how to a
user. Like, you probably shouldn't solicit an app store review right after the
user has encountered an error. (Unless you'd like to have a really low rating,
of course.)

[tfas]: <2020-07-07-thinking-fast-slow-takeaways.html>

## Eloquent JavaScript

![[*Eloquent JavaScript: A Modern Introduction to Programming*][ejs], 3rd ed.,
by Marijn Haverbeke](images/2023-01-01-ejs-cover.jpg)

[ejs]: <https://eloquentjavascript.net/>

This was my third attempt at reading this. The first time around I had made it
through the first two parts, then for some reason I stopped for a long time and
started over, and then the third edition of the book came out and I kind of had
to start over again.

In any case, this time I finished, and I think it's an excellent book! The
exercises are fun and insightful, the online playground is well done, and it's
fully open source. I did all the [exercises], and two silly creations from
there now even have a permanent home on my blog ([here][ex1] and [here][ex2]).

[exercises]: <https://github.com/bewuethr/exercises/tree/main/eloquent_js>
[ex1]: <2022-01-09-mouse-trail.html>
[ex2]: <2022-01-16-game-of-life.html>

## Employee Surveys That Work

![[*Employee Survyes That Work: Improving Design, Use, and Organizational
Impact*][estw] by Alec Levenson](images/2023-01-01-estw-cover.jpg)

[estw]: <https://ceo.usc.edu/2014/05/26/employee-surveys-that-work-improving-design-use-and-organizational-impact/>

I was doing a survey for developers at work, and wanted to read something to
help me avoid mistakes. This was nice and short, though I'm not sure how useful
it really was. In the end, I drew a lot more value from the [*Developer
Productivity Survey*][devprod] article by Will Larson on his Infrastructure
Engineering website.

[devprod]: <https://infraeng.dev/developer-survey/>

## 1984

![[*1984*][1984] by George Orwell](images/2023-01-01-1984-cover.jpg)

[1984]: <https://www.penguin.co.uk/books/56487/1984-by-orwell-george/9780141036144>

I'm trying to (re-)read classics I definitely wasn't able to appreciate when
told to read them in high school (like *Brave New World*, which I re-read in
2019), or this one, which I haven't read before. I'm not going to bother and
try to add a meaningful review here, but I enjoyed it a lot, and the
speakers/screens in every room... I think that prediction has come true
:grimacing:

## The Psychology of Money

![[*The Psychology of Money: Timeless Lessons on Wealth, Greed, and
Happiness*][pom] by Morgan Housel](images/2023-01-01-pom-cover.jpg)

[pom]: <https://www.harriman-house.com/psychologyofmoney>

We read this in the book club at work. It's based on the [essay of the same
name][pomessay], and my slightly snarky review would be that just reading the
essay probably is a much better bang for buck. I didn't hate it, but I also
didn't feel like it gave me some deep insights. I will read the essay at some
point, though, and maybe walk back this assessment.

If I had to pick one thing I *did* like, it's the notion of "wealth is what you
don't see": the "cars not purchased", the "upgrade declined".

> It's assets in the bank that haven't yet been converted into the stuff you
> see.

[pomessay]: <https://collabfund.com/blog/the-psychology-of-money/>

## The DevOps Handbook

![[*The DevOps Handbook: How to Create World-Class Agility, Reliability, &
Security in Technology Organizations*][doh] by Gene Kim *et
al.*](images/2023-01-01-doh-cover.jpg)

[doh]: <https://itrevolution.com/product/the-devops-handbook-second-edition/>

Apparently, 2021 saw a second edition of this, but O'Reilly only has the first
edition from 2016, so that's what I read. I think this brings the most value
when read right after [*The Phoenix Project*][tpp], because it makes so many of
the concepts introduced there more clear and concrete.

I read TPP in 2018, but thanks to [*The Unicorn Project*][tup] and [*The
Goal*][goal], there was no shortage of business books written as novels in the
first person until I got around to reading the DevOps Handbook.

[tpp]: <https://itrevolution.com/product/the-phoenix-project/>
[tup]: <2020-02-24-unicorn-project-review.html>
[goal]: <2022-01-01-2021-in-books.html#the-goal>

## Masters of Doom

![[*Masters of Doom: How Two Guys Created an Empire and Transformed Pop
Culture*][mofd] by David Kushner](images/2023-01-01-mofd-cover.jpg)

[mofd]: <https://www.penguinrandomhouse.ca/books/96382/masters-of-doom-by-david-kushner/9780812972153>

I haven't actually played many of the more recent id games, but mostly ancient
ones (such as Commander Keen). How id has pushed what's possible technically
has always fascinated me, though, and this book is an excellent retelling of
the entire story. Plus, I love reading about places that must have been special
to work at.

## Building Microservices

![[*Building Microservices: Designing Fine-Grained Systems*][bumi], 2nd ed., by
Sam Newman](images/2023-01-01-bumi-cover.jpg)

[bumi]: <https://www.oreilly.com/library/view/building-microservices-2nd/9781492034018/>

We read this in the tech book club at work. It doesn't go super deep, but gives
a nice high-level overview of the topic. It would sometimes talk about
challenges one might encounter without really talking about solution
approaches, but more often than not, those would be discussed in [*Designing
Data-Intensive Applications*][ddia], which we read previously.

Much was also very complementary to [*The DevOps
Handbook*](#the-devops-handbook), or maybe that was just top of mind because
the readings overlapped.

[ddia]: <2021-02-02-ddia-review.html>

## Modern Web Development on the JAMstack

![[*Modern Web Development on the JAMstack*][wdotjs] by Mathias Biilmann and
Phil Hawksworth](images/2023-01-01-wdotjs-cover.jpg)

[wdotjs]: <https://www.oreilly.com/library/view/modern-web-development/9781492058571/>

This is more of a "report" than a book, and I read it because I started working
with Jekyll around that time. It talks about JAMstack as a new paradigm for web
development, and was a quick and easy read to solidity my understanding of the
space.

## Neuromancer

![[*Neuromancer*][neuman] by William Gibson](images/2023-01-01-neuman-cover.jpg)

[neuman]: <https://www.penguinrandomhouse.ca/books/293994/neuromancer-by-william-gibson/9780441007462>

I had heard of *Neuromancer* often before, and wanted to tackle a few seminal
science fiction books for a while, so this is where I started. The alternative
would have been *Snow Crash* by Neal Stephenson, which I still plan to read,
but later.

Gibson coined the term "cyberspace", and this novel is considered instrumental
in the birth of the cyberpunk genre, though Gibson himself apparently doesn't
like it being called that. I definitely had to look up a lot more words than
usual when reading, and as it turns out, a bunch of them are totally made up by
Gibson and exist only in the universe of the *Sprawl* trilogy.

It was a very entertaining read, but I'm pretty sure I haven't understood
everything fully.

## Count Zero

![[*Count Zero*][couzer] by William Gibson](images/2023-01-01-couzer-cover.jpg)

[couzer]: <https://www.penguinrandomhouse.ca/books/297345/count-zero-by-william-gibson/9780441013678>

Clearly, I thought I should go all in and read the whole *Sprawl* trilogy as
fast as possible. This might have contributed to everything being a bit of a
blur, but Gibson doesn't make it easy, either, and loves to have the story
develop in multiple separate threads, which come together only at the every
end.

As usual, I had to discover the big reveal by reading about it elsewhere rather
than "getting" it from the book itself, but that's fine---the experience of
reading was not made worse by that.

## Mona Lisa Overdrive

![[*Mona Lisa Overdrive*][moliov] by William Gibson](images/2023-01-01-moliov-cover.jpg)

[moliov]: <https://www.penguinrandomhouse.ca/books/59653/mona-lisa-overdrive-by-william-gibson/9780553281743>

The final book in the *Sprawl* trilogy is a bit more obviously set in the same
universe; rather than just brand names and the like re-appearing, some of the
main characters are actually the same as in the other books.

And, like in the other books, it was more about the journey than the
destination, as again, I totally did not get the big reveal at the end.

## The Pragmatic Programmer

![[*The Pragmatic Programmer: Your Journey to Mastery*][pragprog], 20th
Anniversary Edition, by David Thomas and Andrew
Hunt](images/2023-01-01-pragprog-cover.jpg)

[pragprog]: <https://pragprog.com/titles/tpp20/the-pragmatic-programmer-20th-anniversary-edition/>

Reading this was part of my efforts to get through *those* books that appear on
every single "must read" list for software people.

It wasn't terrible, but even though this revised edition came out in 2019, it
felt very dated overall. I did take away a few things that I haven't thought
about before in the way the book presents them, such as "tracer bullets", and
applying the "broken windows" theory to code.

Overall, though, I certainly don't agree with the "live-changing!" reviews
elsewhere, and the awful reading experience in the O'Reilly app didn't help.
Code blocks are, for some reason, displayed all centred, instead of using
correctly indented lines...

## Stolen Focus

![[*TITLE*][xxx] by AUTHOR](images/2023-01-01-xxx-cover.jpg)

[xxx]: <>

Text

## Burning Chrome

![[*TITLE*][xxx] by AUTHOR](images/2023-01-01-xxx-cover.jpg)

[xxx]: <>

Text

## Clean Code

![[*TITLE*][xxx] by AUTHOR](images/2023-01-01-xxx-cover.jpg)

[xxx]: <>

Text

## Sass for Web Designers

![[*TITLE*][xxx] by AUTHOR](images/2023-01-01-xxx-cover.jpg)

[xxx]: <>

Text

## Dinosaur Brains

![[*TITLE*][xxx] by AUTHOR](images/2023-01-01-xxx-cover.jpg)

[xxx]: <>

Text

## Head First Design Patterns

![[*TITLE*][xxx] by AUTHOR](images/2023-01-01-xxx-cover.jpg)

[xxx]: <>

Text

## The Difference Engine

![[*TITLE*][xxx] by AUTHOR](images/2023-01-01-xxx-cover.jpg)

[xxx]: <>

Text
